---
bibliography: /home/raim/ref/tata.bib
output:
    pdf_document: default
geometry: margin=3cm,top=2.5cm
---



Dear Editors,

We submit a short report on an old method, that has recently re-gained
some relevance, for your consideration as a Method Article in Biology
Methods and Protocols.

Plasmid supercoiling decreases during the dark phase in cyanobacteria:
a clarification of the interpretation of chloroquine-agarose gels.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.07.26.453679 

The paper describes a very old method [@Keller1975b], separation of
plasmid topoisomers by agarose gel electrophoresis in the presence of
a DNA intercalator. Measuring the linking number of supercoiled
plasmids was instrumental in clarification of higher order DNA double
helix structures such as nucleosomes and plectonemes in the
1970s-1980s. However, this method, especially the correct interpretation
of the gels, is rather tricky, and a lot of hands-on knowledge has
since been forgotten in standard microbiology laboratories.

The method has re-gained attention, since DNA supercoiling is (again)
researched for its basal role in regulation of bacterial physiology.
Specifically, plasmid supercoiling varies and this correlates with
genome-wide transcription variation during the diurnal cycle of
cyanobacteria [@Woelfle2007; @Vijayan2009]. However, these two papers
differ in their interpretation of the gels, despite using very similar
conditions. The authors of the latter paper were aware of this
conflicting interpretation, but did not explicity mention it - one has
to dig deep into the Methods section and into the principles of
topoisomer separation in the presence of an intercalator, to
understand this fact. This is harmful for the field of circadian
biology of cyanobacteria, and should in our opinion be clarified.

In our case, we are currently working on a revision for Nucl Acids Res
(preprint: @Behle2021pre), where we rely on the correct interpretation
of these gels. It would be possible for us, to just mention in the
Methods section, that we "analyzed mobility by varying chloroquine
variations (data not shown)" as many others do, or add a supplemental
figure.  However, the method is complex and elegant, and Keller's band
counting method is a true gem in the history of DNA biology. We
believe it deserves an official review and update, motivated by a
specific case of mis-interpretation.

Moreover, our manuscript is the first to describe an adaptation of
Keller's method to more modern standards, using the ubiquitous pUC19
plasmid and chloroquine instead of ethidium bromide (EtBr) as an
intercalator. Chloroquine is not only less toxic but also leads to a
cleaner separation of topoisomers than EtBR.

with best regards,


Rainer Machne, 
on behalf of all authors

\footnotesize
